[Amit Varma]: Before we move on with this episode of the Scene in the Unseen, do check out another
[Amit Varma]: awesome podcast from IVM Podcast, Cyrus Says, hosted by my old buddy, Cyrus Brocha.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things that most irritates me about political punditry in India is when people
[Amit Varma]: talk of our politics in terms of left wing and right wing.
[Amit Varma]: The thing is, this whole construct of left wing and right wing parties is a concept imported
[Amit Varma]: from the West and doesn't really apply to India.
[Amit Varma]: The truth is, all our parties are pretty much alike on the left-right spectrum.
[Amit Varma]: Every party is left-wing on economics, including the BJP, which despite its recent rhetoric,
[Amit Varma]: believes in a big role for the state and may be pro-business, but it is certainly not pro-markets.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, between 2014 and 2019, there was nothing in Narendra Modi's economic management
[Amit Varma]: that was different from what Manmohan Singh would have done if in power, except perhaps
[Amit Varma]: for demonetization, which was reminiscent of Indira Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: Arun Shourie famously called the Modi government as UPA plus cow, but even cow is not really
[Amit Varma]: a differentiator, as the Congress resorted to soft Hindutva during his recent campaign
[Amit Varma]: and includes welfare schemes for cows in some of the states where it is in charge.
[Amit Varma]: In other words, all our political parties are left-wing on economics and right-wing
[Amit Varma]: on social issues, and therefore against individual freedom in every domain, much to the dismay
[Amit Varma]: of those like me who believe in individual rights.
[Amit Varma]: It is clear that much of our politics is based around identity.
[Amit Varma]: It is also clear that much of our politics is based around patronage and the bribery
[Amit Varma]: of voters, direct or indirect.
[Amit Varma]: Does this mean that ideology does not play a part in Indian politics?
[Amit Varma]: That is a conventional wisdom, and it is one that we shall examine critically in this episode
[Amit Varma]: of the Scene and the Unseen.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Rahul Verma, the co-author with Pradeep Chhibber of Ideology and Identity,
[Amit Varma]: a fantastic new book that makes the argument that contrary to the assumptions of many,
[Amit Varma]: including myself before I read this book, Indian politics is actually deeply ideological
[Amit Varma]: in nature.
[Amit Varma]: Rahul is not related to me.
[Amit Varma]: Indeed, he is a Verma who spells his name V-E-R-M-A, while I am a V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: His is the most common spelling, and it's a pet peeve of mine that so many journalists
[Amit Varma]: spell my name wrong with an E instead of an A. One could argue that my objection is rooted
[Amit Varma]: in identity, but I would say that it's rooted in ideology, for it's a core philosophical
[Amit Varma]: belief of mine that we must respect all other individuals, especially when it comes to how
[Amit Varma]: they spell their names.
[Amit Varma]: Before I begin my conversation with Rahul on more serious matters of ideology and identity,
[Amit Varma]: let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: This episode of the Scene and the Unseen is brought to you by Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: Storytel is an audiobook platform which you can listen to on your Android or iOS app.
[Amit Varma]: They have thousands of audiobooks that you can listen to on your mobile, including hundreds
[Amit Varma]: in local languages like Hindi and Marathi, and unlimited monthly subscription costs only
[Amit Varma]: rupees 2.99 per month.
[Amit Varma]: And you can also get a 30 day free trial.
[Amit Varma]: If you hop on over to Storytel.com slash IVM, I actually use Storytel myself regularly.
[Amit Varma]: So as long as they sponsor the show, I'm going to recommend one book a week that I love.
[Amit Varma]: The book I want to recommend today is The Handmaid's Tale by Margaret Atwood.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed the TV series, consider that this audio version of the novel is read by
[Amit Varma]: Elizabeth Moss.
[Amit Varma]: Check it out on Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: And remember, you get a 30 day free trial only at Storytel.com slash IVM.
[Amit Varma]: Rahul, welcome to the Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Rahul, tell me a little bit about your background, like what were you trained as?
[Amit Varma]: Were you an economist or social scientist?
[Guest]: What got you into this field?
[Guest]: So I'm a trained political scientist.
[Guest]: I'm completing my PhD from University of California at Berkeley.
[Guest]: Currently, I'm a fellow at the Center for Policy Research.
[Guest]: What got me interested into politics?
[Guest]: Frankly, I don't know.
[Guest]: I was interested in elections and politics as a child, perhaps.
[Guest]: So as a child, I was sort of like, like most kids, I was a very naughty character.
[Amit Varma]: Where was this?
[Guest]: So I was born very close to Ayodhya, a small town in my village, which is very close to
[Guest]: Ayodhya.
[Guest]: So growing up, I basically witnessed two political phenomena that changed India forever.
[Guest]: I didn't understand those two phenomena then, the Mandal politics as well as the Ram Mandir
[Guest]: politics.
[Guest]: So literally, my first memory of Ram Mandir agitation and mobilization was that you can
[Guest]: see buses with policemen.
[Guest]: And all these policemen, what they do is basically eat banana and throw on the road.
[Guest]: Later on, I figured out banana is a high energy fruit and you know, that's why these policemen
[Guest]: eat it.
[Guest]: So that's, that's my memory of a curfew.
[Guest]: When when you see a curfew, you will see lots of policemen in buses and they will be basically
[Guest]: eating bananas.
[Guest]: So as a kid, I used to do all tamasha during the day.
[Guest]: So during summer vacations, my father basically asked me to read newspapers.
[Guest]: And in the evening, when he'll come back from his office, I have to tell him what is on
[Guest]: the front page, what is on the sports space.
[Guest]: And so I, as a child was just four, five or six, I started reading newspapers out of fear
[Guest]: that I'll get sort of scolded in the evening if I don't do my homework.
[Guest]: So I used to do a homework on newspapers.
[Guest]: And I used to read.
[Guest]: So because I was growing up in UP, at home, I was getting Hindi newspapers.
[Guest]: So both on the sports page, as well as on politics page, I used to hear funny proper
[Guest]: nouns, right?
[Guest]: So in UP, there's a constituency near Mirzapur, which was Robert's ganj, you know, as a four
[Guest]: or five year old kid, I was like, Roberts, I had heard in Hindi movies.
[Guest]: So why is there a Robert's ganj, or if you read in the newspaper, all these terms are
[Guest]: spelled very like, like before wicket is pagbada.
[Guest]: And you know, these, these just used to sound funny in my head and and so I think that's
[Guest]: how I got interested in politics, reading about them, sort of making a notebook both
[Guest]: of cricket scores.
[Guest]: So cricket and politics both also have a component of numbers, if you win elections, you have
[Guest]: to be right on the numbers.
[Guest]: So I used to sort of maintain a notebook for a very long period of time on both cricket
[Guest]: scores and on both political scores.
[Guest]: And somehow, I think that got interested me in politics.
[Amit Varma]: And do you think just thinking aloud, do you think that, unlike other English speaking
[Amit Varma]: elites like myself, for that matter, who I mean, I grew up just reading English newspapers,
[Amit Varma]: unfortunately, did the fact that you were reading Hindi newspapers day in and day out
[Amit Varma]: since you were a kid, did that give you a slightly different understanding of politics
[Amit Varma]: from the people who are your peers today?
[Guest]: So I don't know that, but even today, I order a Hindi newspaper.
[Guest]: And if you look at Hindi newspapers, their coverage is very different from what you get
[Guest]: in English newspapers.
[Guest]: So I don't know about a different perspective, but I certainly get to see more things than
[Guest]: what get covered in a Hindi newspaper.
[Guest]: The editorials in Hindi newspapers are very, very different on very different subjects.
[Guest]: And I remember, a couple of years ago, there was a debate in a couple of English newspapers
[Guest]: by Ram Guha, Sagarika and other people basically writing on this topic.
[Guest]: Why don't we have conservative public intellectuals?
[Guest]: And my answer was, perhaps you don't read vernacular newspapers.
[Guest]: Because your point is we do.
[Guest]: We do.
[Guest]: They just don't write in English.
[Guest]: If you read Marathi newspapers, if you read Kannada newspapers.
[Guest]: So in fact, because I have been reading Hindi newspapers, so I know Hindi public intellectuals
[Guest]: who have conservative viewpoint.
[Guest]: And then I asked my other friends who read Marathi or Kannada newspapers, and they said
[Guest]: we do have these things.
[Guest]: So I think certainly, you get a very different point of view by reading vernacular language
[Amit Varma]: newspapers.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, as you as you kind of grow up, and then you got into the academics of it
[Amit Varma]: as well, who are the sort of thinkers who influence the way you think about politics
[Amit Varma]: in the world?
[Amit Varma]: Are there any books that you can recommend to my listeners or books that you feel changed
[Guest]: the way you think about the world?
[Guest]: There is a long list of both thinkers and books that have influenced me.
[Guest]: I so I'm a political science or politics nerd.
[Guest]: So you know, I read things, I don't know, but there's no time of either reading or sort
[Guest]: of like working on things.
[Guest]: But so if you think of good Indian political scientists who people should read, perhaps
[Guest]: in the older generation, Rajnikothari, Randhir Singh, who was a big Marxist theorist.
[Guest]: If you to read contemporary people, I think Pratap Bhanu Mehta who writes in Indian Express
[Guest]: is one of our foremost political philosophers.
[Guest]: I think Yogendra Yadav still, when he sort of like, despite being in politics, I think
[Guest]: some of his writings are very illuminating.
[Guest]: There were some social scientists who were American, but they worked on India, Myron
[Guest]: Weiner's work on Congress Party, child in the state, migration and nativism.
[Guest]: I think Suzanne and Lloyd Rudolph's work on the political economy of India.
[Guest]: So there are lots of political scientists who have influenced.
[Guest]: I think I also read a lot of Hindi fiction.
[Guest]: So if people want to sort of like, Raag Darbari is one classic Shrilal Shukla, but Mela Achal,
[Guest]: we were talking about Kashi Nath Singh.
[Guest]: So one advice which I got from my PhD advisor, that if you're not getting idea, read fiction.
[Guest]: So don't read too much political science, but also read fiction.
[Guest]: And I think fiction, poetry makes you think about things in a very different context.
[Guest]: So I love reading poetry, I grew up in a small village, but my schooling was from Lucknow.
[Guest]: So there is some influence of Lucknow.
[Guest]: I think even like, I have always been fascinated by two line share or six line couplets, which
[Guest]: basically tries to bring a very, very complex thought into, say, 10 or 12 words, right.
[Guest]: So I do think people, perhaps Dhumil, I don't know, there have been so many poets who have
[Guest]: influenced me, generally, I think.
[Guest]: So I don't read much political philosophy, perhaps later in my life, I'll do that.
[Guest]: But as part of course, curriculums, I have read, I think, Hobbes, Rousseau, Locke, and
[Guest]: all of these have made influential points.
[Guest]: What books people should read, I think, read as much as you can.
[Guest]: And just look at like top 50 novels in your language, which you are comfortable with or
[Guest]: top 50 novels in English.
[Guest]: I don't know what names to give to you.
[Amit Varma]: But...
[Amit Varma]: No, fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, what you said definitely strikes a chord with me, because I haven't read remotely
[Amit Varma]: as much in Hindi as you obviously have.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, if someone were to ask me, how do we understand India of the 1960s and
[Amit Varma]: 70s?
[Amit Varma]: And I would say there is no better book than Raag Darbari.
[Amit Varma]: How do we understand the nature of the Indian state?
[Amit Varma]: I would say there is no better book than Raag Darbari.
[Amit Varma]: You can pick up books by historians and political theorists and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But the sort of magic in a good work of fiction that, you know, capture society and Raag Darbari
[Amit Varma]: incidentally is available on Storytel, who are the sponsors right now of The Seen and
[Amit Varma]: the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: So you can actually listen to it in Hindi over there, even if you're not comfortable
[Amit Varma]: reading the language.
[Amit Varma]: So sort of moving on from there, you know, let's come to the book that we're talking
[Amit Varma]: about, which you've co-written with Pradeep Chhibber, Ideological Identity.
[Guest]: How did you come to this subject?
[Guest]: So Pradeep Chhibber, he's my PhD advisor, he's a professor of political science at University
[Guest]: of California, Berkeley.
[Guest]: Pradeep is considered one of the foremost experts on party politics and party systems.
[Guest]: And he has written some very interesting books on party systems.
[Guest]: But before this book, he wrote another book, which I think didn't get attention.
[Guest]: The title of the book is Religious Practice and Democracy in India.
[Guest]: And what he shows in that book, that religious practice in India, especially the public.
[Guest]: So this is all based on data, survey data.
[Guest]: So people who go to, say, religious sites such as temples, gurudwaras, mosques, churches,
[Guest]: and people who participate in religious services, such as bhajan, kirtans, and jalsas, and chur
[Guest]: services, their outlook towards democracy is much more positive than those who don't
[Guest]: practice religion.
[Guest]: And idea is basically that all other sources, which links individuals to the state are sort
[Guest]: of captured.
[Guest]: So if you think of or captured or not working properly, right, basically, you have a capricious
[Guest]: state in India, bureaucracy is discretionary and sort of like discriminates, political
[Guest]: parties have been captured by vested interest.
[Guest]: It is religion or religious places, which even for moments, provides equality to people
[Guest]: from all walks of life.
[Guest]: And that's why those who participate in it, they think that the democracy in the country
[Guest]: is functioning much better.
[Guest]: So Pradeep generally, and I think this is largely, I wouldn't say a norm, but slowly
[Guest]: getting more traction, that in natural sciences or in engineering people, they don't write
[Guest]: solo author pieces, you will always see 5, 6, 8, 10 people writing this.
[Guest]: Social sciences was generally where people were doing solo work.
[Guest]: But nowadays, given this lot more emphasis on sort of like data related work, and this
[Guest]: basically brings much more collaboration than earlier.
[Guest]: And there, I think I see much more collaborative work happening between not just professors,
[Guest]: but professors and their mentees and students.
[Guest]: So Pradeep generally works with all of his students.
[Guest]: So I am not an exception to the large community of scholars.
[Guest]: He has been sort of producing in last 20 odd years.
[Guest]: So we were writing couple of op-eds and Pradeep generally likes to take a walk when he wants
[Guest]: to discuss something, right?
[Guest]: So he loves running.
[Guest]: And so I think this was around Independence Day, we were in Berkeley, and somehow the
[Guest]: conversation started happening that there is a long shadow of partition, right?
[Guest]: The same themes emerging every five, six years, the debate on majoritarianism or how to accommodate
[Guest]: religious minorities into body politic, the debate on reservation resonates every time.
[Guest]: So we thought that and these were some of the founding debates we were having at the
[Guest]: time of independence.
[Guest]: And so I think the idea started germinating from there.
[Guest]: So during the 2014 elections, what we did is wrote series of op-eds on six, seven chapters,
[Guest]: which you see in the book.
[Guest]: Basically we tested our idea in 1,200 words each.
[Guest]: And once we got enough reactions, so we did start with the classic economic and social
[Guest]: ideology framework.
[Guest]: That's where we started.
[Guest]: And in the data, there wasn't any difference in the economic, so there was a difference
[Guest]: on the social ideology or social conservatism.
[Guest]: But between parties, there was no difference on the economic ideology front.
[Guest]: And then we started wondering why we don't see the other dimension, which is so much
[Guest]: prevalent in Western Europe and North America.
[Guest]: And that got us into thinking, perhaps either our polity is one dimensional, or there is
[Guest]: a second dimension, but there is something unique about our own historical and cultural
[Guest]: context.
[Guest]: And we started reading about things and that's how the collaborative process began.
[Amit Varma]: I was struck by a quote, which actually comes towards the end of your book, but kind of
[Amit Varma]: sums up the conventional wisdom which your book is questioning.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a quote from the Italian Giovano Sartori, quote, ideology does not strike roots
[Amit Varma]: in all types of soil.
[Amit Varma]: And while there is very little evidence to the effect that ideological factors do have
[Amit Varma]: empirical relevance in African context, it is abundantly clear that most of what is spoken
[Amit Varma]: as ideology is mere political rhetoric, and at the same time image selling to Western
[Amit Varma]: public.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this applies to India as well.
[Amit Varma]: And early on in your introduction, you guys write, quote, contemporary Indian Party politics
[Amit Varma]: is commonly viewed as chaotic, centered around leaders, corrupt, volatile, and non ideological
[Amit Varma]: in nature.
[Amit Varma]: What accounts for this perception and for the corollary view that elections in India
[Amit Varma]: are really, if ever, genuine contest of ideas, policies, and visions, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: So why does this perception then then kind of exist?
[Guest]: So the couple of so, apart from this quote, there was another interesting, I think letter
[Guest]: to the editor in New York Times or somewhere where someone basically went on a rant that,
[Guest]: you know, Indian political parties are just alphabets, one lot siding with the other lot.
[Guest]: It's not a solemn selection of leader of 1.3 billion, but like a children's game show.
[Guest]: But if you if you remember, 2014 election or 2019 election, both the Congress Party
[Guest]: leaders, the top leaders in the Congress Party, as well as BJP leaders was, in fact, unequivocally
[Guest]: saying that this is a fight or battle for the soul of India, or this is a fight between
[Guest]: two ideas of India.
[Guest]: So politicians perhaps realize these are ideological battles.
[Guest]: But in our scholarly context, journalistic context, we thought voters do not.
[Guest]: So there is no structure or framework to our politics.
[Guest]: People just vote on their whims, or they get something, and in exchange of those favors,
[Guest]: they vote particular political party or politician.
[Guest]: So we don't want to go that route.
[Guest]: And we tried to avoid as much as we could, we didn't want to go on a rant against this
[Guest]: whole perception of that Indian politics is non ideological.
[Guest]: But we do wanted to make a point that any departure from how politics is conducted in
[Guest]: best is seen as primordial, or the politics in West is structured around ideas, whereas
[Guest]: politics in developing world is just taking some samosas, some liquor, some sari and voting
[Amit Varma]: for the tribal instincts and so on.
[Guest]: So we were sort of like bugged with this sort of characterization of about Indian politics.
[Guest]: And this is what is Giovanni Sartori is one of the foremost political scientists, he's
[Guest]: a classic on party systems.
[Guest]: And I like his writing, when I read this stuff, I thought this should go in our book, because
[Guest]: this is what we are sort of like, challenging that we may not developing countries like
[Guest]: India or postcolonial countries like India may not have the same structure of politics
[Guest]: as the West.
[Guest]: But the departure should not be understood as these countries, there is no framework
[Guest]: to our politics.
[Guest]: So I think that was sort of like beginning of why we wanted to sort of take on on this
[Guest]: argument.
[Guest]: The perception has remained is I think, what we would like to describe as a fake fact of
[Guest]: politics.
[Guest]: And there is no basis to make that claim.
[Guest]: But once that claim started gaining ground, it became sort of a truism or a normal assumption
[Amit Varma]: about our politics.
[Amit Varma]: No, and what it strikes me and this is even a mere culpa of sorts in the sense that this
[Amit Varma]: perception this looking at Indian politics through a left right prism through a fundamentally
[Amit Varma]: Western prism and saying that, oh, okay, it doesn't function along this prism.
[Amit Varma]: Therefore, it is sort of non ideological, and it's on all these other factors, which
[Amit Varma]: is one that I've held for so long, and your book is making me reconsider really comes
[Amit Varma]: from mostly from political thinkers or theorists or columnists or pundits who are a part of
[Amit Varma]: the English speaking elite whose education is kind of Western, whether it is in the West
[Amit Varma]: or here.
[Amit Varma]: And as you pointed out earlier in the episode, you've grown up reading Hindi newspapers,
[Amit Varma]: and therefore it's you weren't exactly captured by the elite in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: You also had access to expressions of different contestations and, you know, a different set
[Amit Varma]: of intellectuals from where you came.
[Amit Varma]: Before we kind of proceed by talking about the book, I think it's kind of useful to define
[Amit Varma]: some of the terms because they get confusing you.
[Guest]: So for example, define ideology.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Well, I just wanted to sort of get back to one point, which is basically this departure
[Guest]: from the West.
[Guest]: Democracy is sort of understood and defined very differently in the context of West, whereas
[Guest]: democracy in the context of postcolonial and underdeveloped countries is always defined
[Guest]: with an adjective, right?
[Guest]: That is, this is not a perfect democracy, it has become an ethnic democracy, it has
[Guest]: become something like that.
[Guest]: If you come to think of it, India is one of the busiest laboratories of democratic politics.
[Guest]: And I think now, so in US, when we used to make presentations, not just me, but many
[Guest]: times, if people who work on South Asia or Africa or some other country, there would
[Guest]: be a general question.
[Guest]: And this is a legitimate question.
[Guest]: How far does your theory travel to other parts of the world?
[Guest]: And sometimes in my irritation, I used to basically, if not in public, I do used to
[Guest]: say that I don't care if it doesn't travel.
[Guest]: In every theory, we own one sixth, right?
[Guest]: So given the size of our population, we now need to sort of like the theory of democracy
[Guest]: now needs to move out from the best West and see how it is being practiced in a country
[Guest]: like India, or Bangladesh, or say, Philippines, and those theories now sort of like needs
[Guest]: revision.
[Amit Varma]: And no, I get what you're saying.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a certain condescension there from people on the West who are sort of saying
[Amit Varma]: that, here's our theory and our theory is paramount.
[Amit Varma]: And does it fit you?
[Amit Varma]: Or does it not?
[Amit Varma]: And but asking different questions of your theory, where you actually have to kind of
[Amit Varma]: prove that it travels, as you said, which I can understand why you were irritated by
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: So let's go to ideology, let's talk about, you know, since your book is centered around
[Amit Varma]: ideology, define it for me.
[Guest]: So we take a very sort of like watertight definition of what we consider as ideological
[Guest]: conflict, right, which is basically issue bundle.
[Guest]: And many of these issues go together.
[Guest]: And voters take basically position on on these issues.
[Guest]: So it might happen that you care about one issue more than the other, but because it
[Guest]: is part of your issue bundle, you will have some position closer to your preference.
[Guest]: But for anything to become ideological and structure party politics, we claim that it
[Guest]: must meet four conditions.
[Guest]: One, every election can have a very different issue, which drives that election.
[Guest]: But for something to become the basis of ideological conflict, it needs to be stable for a long
[Guest]: period of time.
[Guest]: Because it is an idea, it must have an intellectual origin.
[Guest]: There must be people or intellectuals, elites, writing about it, debating about it and talking
[Guest]: about it.
[Guest]: So the second criteria is it must have an intellectual basis.
[Guest]: Third, to reach that idea to masses, it needs channels of transmission from political or
[Guest]: social elites to masses.
[Guest]: Fourth, it must have enough number of people on each side of the divide, because unless
[Guest]: that happens, you won't see political parties taking a clear stand on any on that issue.
[Guest]: And that wouldn't become a basis of ideological conflict.
[Guest]: And I think to think about why we make this argument that the Indian version of ideological
[Guest]: conflict is very different, because those ideas are born out of historical experiences
[Guest]: and trajectories.
[Guest]: And the historical experience of the West and the postcolonial country, like India was
[Guest]: very, very different.
[Guest]: And that's why our ideological conflict are going to be very, very different.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a very fascinating part of your book where you kind of elaborate on the four
[Amit Varma]: different ways in which ideology as the West understands it is formed in the West and why
[Amit Varma]: none of those apply to India because of a completely different set of circumstances
[Amit Varma]: and histories.
[Guest]: Can you elaborate on what those four ways are?
[Guest]: So this is a very famous thesis by Lipset and Roca and those are two great political
[Guest]: scientists.
[Guest]: So the claim they make that the West European party system is frozen in four cleavages.
[Guest]: The four cleavages were basically labor versus capital, rural versus urban, center versus
[Guest]: periphery and church versus state.
[Guest]: Those were the four sort of like main cleavages on which party politics in West Europe happened.
[Guest]: And it happened because West Europe underwent a historical trajectory of first renaissance,
[Guest]: reformation, then industrial revolution.
[Guest]: Industrial revolution produced capital, labor divide.
[Guest]: It also, because of industrial revolution, it also created an urban-rural divide.
[Guest]: There was always a center-periphery issue going on in many parts of those countries
[Guest]: and the church and state thing comes from renaissance and reformation.
[Guest]: A country like India never underwent this historical experience.
[Guest]: Overnight, we became an independent nation-state from a colony.
[Guest]: So for us, while nation-building debates were happening in the background, but we suddenly
[Guest]: become an independent or sovereign country within a matter of night.
[Guest]: And at the time of independence, most of these countries like India were so poor, so rural
[Guest]: that you cannot have a politics on these cleavages.
[Guest]: In fact, when Nehru stands in the Constituent Assembly to begin the objective resolution,
[Guest]: he basically begins with that the first task of this assembly is to clothe the naked, feed
[Guest]: the hungry.
[Guest]: So the state, in a sense, there was a consensus that the state is going to take the burden
[Guest]: of poor, right?
[Guest]: And that's why we don't see divide on economic ideology.
[Guest]: There may be minor differences on the route to welfare model.
[Guest]: But I don't think any political party, as you said, in India is pro-market in that sense,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: We don't have market versus state debate among our political parties, barring, I think, the
[Guest]: communist parties, which has a clear, at least written prescription, but I don't know whether
[Guest]: they follow the same thing on the ground.
[Guest]: So the two axes could not have, so they didn't take off.
[Guest]: The center-periphery debate could have taken off.
[Guest]: And there were riot-like situation, in fact, on the question of integration of various
[Guest]: parts of India.
[Guest]: And I think that problem got in some ways resolved by the reorganization of state into
[Guest]: linguistic provinces.
[Guest]: So language, politics now was just centered within the state, not vis-a-vis the center.
[Guest]: So I think there were some steps taken in 1950s and 60s, which restricted the center-state
[Guest]: fight emerging as a central issue of, basically, as a national issue in that sense.
[Guest]: It remained localized.
[Guest]: So you would see in Tamil Nadu, a fight with Delhi or in Jammu Kashmir, a fight with Delhi,
[Guest]: but that does not become a mobilizing plank across India, especially in the large parts
[Guest]: of Hindi heartland.
[Guest]: The fourth, in India, we never had that kind of centralized church, Hinduism never had
[Guest]: that kind of...
[Amit Varma]: It's very diffused, almost outsourced.
[Guest]: Yes, so we never had a church versus, at the time of independence, there was no church
[Guest]: versus state conflict that was happening.
[Guest]: But we could in some way, sort of like, argue that religion or accommodation of religious
[Guest]: minorities did become a meta-narrative of Indian politics, and it does resonate still
[Guest]: today.
[Amit Varma]: Right, so you kind of pointed out and I found your arguments quite convincing and obviously
[Amit Varma]: agree with them that these four sort of ideological cleavages of the West don't apply to India.
[Amit Varma]: However, you said this does not mean that India does not have ideological contestations
[Amit Varma]: and you talk about two specific ideological battlegrounds, which have been ideological
[Amit Varma]: battlegrounds for decades, and therefore they are stable and they meet all your other conditions
[Amit Varma]: of the ideology that they are stable, they have intellectual elites on both sides, they
[Amit Varma]: are propagated through all the various kinds of means.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me what those two are.
[Guest]: So we basically argue that Indian politics is structured by two ideological scales.
[Guest]: One, we describe it as politics of recognition, which is basically the idea of bringing different
[Guest]: groups into the body politic and what would be the method of accommodation.
[Guest]: So debates on reservations and quota, whether the Indian state should hew to majoritarian
[Guest]: characteristic, that basically forms the bulk of basis of politics of recognition.
[Guest]: And if you read the Constituent Assembly debates, these were the questions on which our founding
[Guest]: fathers, there were very few women in the Constituent Assembly, so founding fathers
[Guest]: were debating about.
[Guest]: The debate on cow slaughter, like I think began in 1909 or something, where members
[Guest]: in the Constituent Assembly are quoting statistics that there were so many thousand cows in the
[Guest]: northwestern frontier provinces, and now their population has decreased to this.
[Guest]: And that's why there is a cow slaughter happening, they will invoke Gandhiji and you know, Constituent
[Guest]: Assembly, you were having these things.
[Guest]: Similarly, the debate on reservations started way back in 18, I think 1882.
[Guest]: So there were some ramblings earlier also in Mysore, in Kolhapur and in Trivandrum.
[Guest]: But in 1882, I think Hunter Commission, so there was a representation by Fule to Hunter
[Guest]: Commission for affirmative action for Dalits and backwards in the education sector.
[Guest]: And I think that debate on reservations began there.
[Guest]: Then it took another shape during the Monte Merlo reforms, Monge Uchemsford reforms, Gandhi
[Guest]: Ambedkar debate, a large part of Constituent Assembly debates were on the reservations,
[Guest]: 1950s Kalelkar.
[Guest]: So I think throughout the last hundred years, we had spurts of moments where the debate
[Guest]: on reservations were happening for different communities.
[Guest]: And I think now with the BJP's final, so in fact, the reservation bill for economically
[Guest]: weaker section, this is the first time it has been passed.
[Guest]: But at different times, various governments have tried to bring this bill, which is what
[Guest]: it is doing is changing the nature of the debate on reservation from sort of historical
[Guest]: reparation and social justice to economic backwardness.
[Guest]: So so there's a very different twist that is being given by BJP on the reservation.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, this particular twist is almost one which takes it from your first ideological
[Amit Varma]: cleavage, which is to do with recognition to your second one, which is to do with statism.
[Amit Varma]: So not necessarily, but again, about the state sort of remaking the economy or society by
[Guest]: this kind of.
[Guest]: So we have a very particular understanding of what do we mean by statism.
[Guest]: And I do acknowledge that it may not fully encapsulate what is happening.
[Guest]: So in our view, the role of the state in society has a very different conception in Western
[Guest]: political thought and Indian political thought.
[Guest]: In the West, society basically makes the state to sort of like reorganize it.
[Guest]: So that's the Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau tradition, whereas if you read Indian political thinkers
[Guest]: and the classic textbooks such as sort of like Mahabharata, Shastra.
[Guest]: So I think the state society conception in Indian political thought is very, very different.
[Guest]: And perhaps there is a reason why we don't have a good theory of state and we don't have
[Guest]: a good theory of kingship.
[Guest]: In fact, in all our texts, there is things written about what a good king should do and
[Guest]: what a bad king would do.
[Guest]: But why do we need a king?
[Guest]: The theory of kingship is not well established in Indian political thought.
[Guest]: So the way these most of these thinkers, not just limited to the Hindu tradition, but it
[Guest]: seems like a subcontinental idea.
[Guest]: And you find resonance of this in some ways in Buddhist thought, Islamic thoughts, as
[Guest]: well as in Hinduism, where the role of the state or the king is to act as the guardian
[Guest]: of the society.
[Guest]: So the state and king cannot sort of like, they should protect the social norms, but
[Guest]: they should not be trying to remake the society.
[Guest]: And they should not even sort of like have redistributive impulse, basically taking away
[Guest]: property and then redistributive.
[Guest]: In fact, if you think about Gandhian idea of trusteeship, it was based on the same notion.
[Guest]: This is not the job of the state to take away property from people who have it.
[Guest]: And so basically changing social economic norms.
[Guest]: And I think, and this is what emerges from Constituent Assembly debates and debates that
[Guest]: were happening on a Hindu court bill at that moment of time, was that people like Ambedkar
[Guest]: and Nehru wanted to use the levers of the state to remove the inequalities in our social
[Guest]: and economic life.
[Guest]: And then there were other members in the Constituent Assembly who were opposed to these ideas.
[Guest]: They thought that this is not the job of the state to remake the society.
[Amit Varma]: And like you explained in your book, it comes, I mean, this whole conflict in a sense comes
[Amit Varma]: from differing perceptions of what is the relationship between the state and the society.
[Amit Varma]: As you say in your book, quote, in Western political theory, Rousseau, Locke and Hegel
[Amit Varma]: are good examples.
[Amit Varma]: Political order means a subjugation of society to the state.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, you might have a state of nature there, but for society to function, you need
[Amit Varma]: the state to protect individual rights and so on.
[Amit Varma]: That's Western political theory.
[Amit Varma]: But to give the contrast to that with what is contained in Indian conservative thought,
[Amit Varma]: you quote Karpatri Maharaj and I'll quote this Karpatri Maharaj's words, quote, in Indian
[Amit Varma]: tradition, the society is always supreme and the ruler is accountable to dharma and society.
[Amit Varma]: The administrator and administration keep changing, but not the society and dharma.
[Amit Varma]: The laws of the state always have to be favorable to religious texts, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: So in that conception, society already exists, it is prior to the state.
[Amit Varma]: And then the state comes in and the state is like sort of an administrative convenience.
[Guest]: That's absolutely correct.
[Guest]: So so in this conception, the role of the state is just a facilitator.
[Guest]: There is permanent feature, which is society.
[Guest]: And the interesting feature about this whole conception is that there may be some sort
[Guest]: of like deformation or bad things that may appear in the society.
[Guest]: Now that the state should not be sort of intervening to remove those bad things, the society would
[Guest]: itself heal up or will come up with solution.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So so think about the problem of untouchability, right?
[Guest]: Gandhi never said the state to sort of like, take the law in hand and remove untouchability.
[Guest]: He basically goes in the society and says, this is a bad thing, we need to reform it.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So so in this framework, or the model, the reform has to come within the society, the
[Guest]: state should not be using a violent mean or a danda to sort of like, correct things.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, one of my favorite quotes about politics is by Andrew Breitbart, where he says, politics
[Amit Varma]: is downstream of culture.
[Amit Varma]: And it would seem that that represents sort of the traditional Indian view.
[Amit Varma]: And it's also very interesting that then the people fighting for statism, as it were, the
[Amit Varma]: state intervening in the economy and in society, were essentially Western educated liberals
[Guest]: like Nehru and Ambedkar.
[Guest]: That is correct.
[Guest]: And Karpatri Maharaj, he's a very interesting character.
[Guest]: And I hope some political theorist works on him.
[Guest]: So Karpatri Maharaj was the founder of Ram Rajya Parishad.
[Guest]: This was an orthodox Hindu party in 1950s, which slowly sort of got merged into Bharatiya
[Guest]: Jan Sangh.
[Guest]: So the quotes are coming from Karpatri Maharaj.
[Guest]: He wrote, I think, more than 1000 page book.
[Guest]: And the name of the book is Marx Vada or Ram Raj.
[Guest]: And he basically is sort of like, challenging not just the Marxist interpretation of the
[Guest]: state and society, but he takes on all possible Western philosophers in that.
[Guest]: And a lot of it is, in some ways, you can call it basically polemic and rhetoric.
[Guest]: But then somebody sitting in the jail and writing these 1000 pages as Indian political
[Unknown]: thought.
[Guest]: Is a translation of it available?
[Guest]: So I have not seen the English translation, I've seen the Hindi one, and it is sold by
[Guest]: Gita Press.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, which is interesting, which connects me to both a past episode and a future episode.
[Amit Varma]: I did an episode a few weeks back with Suyash Rai of Carnegie.
[Amit Varma]: And he mentioned your book in his discussion with me.
[Amit Varma]: And he mentioned this book by Karpatri Maharaj.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm doing a future episode with Akshay Mukul, which should be out in a few weeks
[Amit Varma]: on the Gita Press.
[Amit Varma]: He's written an incredible book on the Gita Press.
[Amit Varma]: So that should be fairly interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And then you've got another quote from Gandhi, quoted by Massani, but a quote from Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: in your book, which is, quote, I look upon an increase in the power of the state with
[Amit Varma]: the greatest fear, because although apparently doing good by minimizing exploitation, it
[Amit Varma]: does the greatest harm to mankind by destroying individuality, which lies at the root of all
[Amit Varma]: progress, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, here he's almost coming down on the side of the traditionalists.
[Amit Varma]: And so tell me a little bit, so these are the two sort of ideological contestations
[Amit Varma]: you've identified.
[Amit Varma]: There is a politics of recognition.
[Amit Varma]: And there is a politics of statism.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about both in turn, let's talk about statism first.
[Amit Varma]: What are the sort of debates taking place around statism at the time of the Constituent
[Amit Varma]: Assembly?
[Amit Varma]: Because it's not as if Gandhi and Ambedkar are getting their view, there's a pushback.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, the cover of your book is really fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: As you pointed out, it's a picture of Nehru's first cabinet.
[Amit Varma]: And the fascinating point you made is that if you just look at them, you know, left to
[Amit Varma]: right, they almost represent where they stand ideologically with Nehru in the center, Shyama
[Amit Varma]: Prasad Mukherjee on the extreme right, and then you have Vallabhbhai Patel and Rajendra
[Amit Varma]: Prasad.
[Amit Varma]: And on the extreme left, you have Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar.
[Amit Varma]: And on the extreme left, you have Dr. Ambedkar and almost representing sort of the very two
[Amit Varma]: cleavages that you talk about, you know, where you could say that the guys on the right like
[Amit Varma]: Shyama Prasad and are against the sort of statism and the intervention that these guys
[Amit Varma]: do.
[Amit Varma]: And the guys like you get to the left, you get to Ambedkar and that's probably the extreme
[Amit Varma]: when it comes to recognition, though, not remotely as extreme as so many people today,
[Amit Varma]: which is quite interesting.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about the battles around statism.
[Guest]: So if you think of 1940s and 50s, statism basically implies using the power of the state
[Guest]: to change social and economic norms.
[Guest]: By social norms, you can take, for example, marriage norms, inheritance norm, and economic
[Guest]: would be, say, redistribution of private property.
[Guest]: Now, the best example of this debate could be found in the debates that were taking place
[Guest]: on the Hindu Code Bill.
[Guest]: In fact, there was so much vociferous opposition to the Hindu Code Bill that the debate started
[Guest]: in, I think, 1940s and it ends in 1956, when Nehru, in fact, had to break down the Hindu
[Guest]: Code Bill into four parts and then get it passed through the parliament.
[Guest]: But before that, I would sort of like the hell broke loose.
[Guest]: Ambedkar thought that Nehru is not serious enough on the Hindu Code Bill because he thought
[Guest]: this is very, very important to give women equal place in the society.
[Guest]: And given Nehru's non-seriousness on the matter, he, in fact, resigned from Nehru's cabinet.
[Guest]: Nehru had different plans and didn't sort of talk, took Ambedkar in confidence on that.
[Guest]: But before this Gandhi-Nehru-Ambedkar battle, Purushottam Das Tandon, in 1953, became the
[Guest]: president of the Congress Party.
[Guest]: And he was one of the traditionalists who was opposed to the Hindu Code Bill.
[Guest]: And Nehru knew with him being the president of the Congress Party, this would not work.
[Guest]: And in a way, Nehru had to revolt, use his charismatic personality and power of the prime
[Guest]: minister to sort of ask Purushottam Das Tandon to step down.
[Guest]: So there was battle within the Congress Party, within the government on this question of
[Guest]: Hindu Code Bill.
[Guest]: And what was Hindu Code Bill?
[Guest]: Basically, trying to sort of like codify marriage and inheritance norms.
[Guest]: And similarly, on the question of redistribution of private property, both, I think, Nehru
[Guest]: had not just the instincts, but he pushed for reforms, land reforms, right?
[Guest]: And look at the kind of opposition it met.
[Guest]: There was sort of a compromise on this.
[Guest]: India was, I think, one of the first countries to have right to property as fundamental rights.
[Guest]: And this was a sort of like pushback traditionalists gave back in the Constituent Assembly that
[Guest]: they got right to private property as a fundamental right.
[Guest]: And Nehru, on the other hand, wanted to push the land reforms and in some ways it failed.
[Guest]: So those were like two big debates that happened in 1950s.
[Amit Varma]: And now, of course, the right to property is no longer a fundamental right.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something I had an episode on with Shruti Rajgopal.
[Amit Varma]: And I think it's episode 26, commend me for my memory, episode 26 of the scene and the
[Amit Varma]: unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'll link it from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting how both Karpatri Maharaj and Maulana Madhuri, one of the founding thinkers
[Amit Varma]: of Islamism, both opposed this kind of redistribution and this kind of statism.
[Amit Varma]: And you kind of wonder, you know, when you talk about, and this is a question I ask many
[Amit Varma]: of my guests, that when we debate sort of the idea of India, that fine, you know, Nehru's
[Amit Varma]: idea of India, some of which I agree with, some of which I don't agree with, but Nehru's
[Amit Varma]: idea of India won out in those founding years, partly because he happened to be a giant of
[Amit Varma]: the freedom movement.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, he was in that position.
[Amit Varma]: And partly because of happenstance that other figures from within his party, like the traditionalist
[Amit Varma]: Hindu wing of his party sort of got sidelined after Vallabhbhai Patel died in 1950.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, he made Pushyantanda stand and step down because he wanted Kripalani
[Amit Varma]: to be Congress president and that wing kind of just faded away.
[Amit Varma]: But my question is this, that before we arrive at what the idea of India should be, and it's
[Amit Varma]: basically a bunch of elites debating that and deciding that, it is also perhaps interesting
[Amit Varma]: to question what is India, and should the idea of India reflect what India is?
[Amit Varma]: And did that idea of India reflect what India was?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you know, later on in time, Dindayal Upadhyay made the point that the constitution
[Amit Varma]: does not reflect India, that it's been foisted by sort of liberal, Western elites and so
[Amit Varma]: on.
[Amit Varma]: And this is then a question that I've asked various people on this podcast, including
[Amit Varma]: Suryash, including Shashi Tharoor a while back and various people.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll ask you now that, you know, how do we resolve this, that let's say that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, we might welcome the idea of a liberal constitution, but if the liberal constitution
[Amit Varma]: is something imposed by elites, by liberal elites on a country which is fundamentally
[Amit Varma]: illiberal, and I don't necessarily use that in a bad way, but which is fundamentally not
[Amit Varma]: liberal, then is that imposition itself not illiberal?
[Guest]: That's a good question, complicated question.
[Guest]: And I don't think I have a good answer to it.
[Guest]: But let me try.
[Guest]: I think so.
[Guest]: First, we must remember, so this idea of India term got popularized by Khilani's book.
[Guest]: But and I think one doesn't need to do a very careful reading, just a cursory reading will
[Guest]: tell you that Khilani talks about ideas of India, he basically says that there were multiple
[Guest]: ideas of India, the idea of India makes the case.
[Guest]: And that's why he's writing about it, because he thinks the idea of India represents the
[Guest]: diversity of not just the diversity of the population, but only the idea of India allows
[Guest]: all other ideas to exist simultaneously.
[Guest]: So so so in that sense, not just diversity, but pluralism, where you sort of like multiple
[Guest]: it is multiplicity of thoughts can sort of coexist.
[Guest]: And perhaps we should in the book in the conclusion, and this is a sort of like a thought experiment
[Guest]: we borrowed from Ashutosh Vashney, which is basically think of like 1940s India, on you
[Guest]: had three strong contenders for power, Vallabhbhai Patel on one hand, and Nehru on the in between,
[Guest]: and then you have Bose on the other hand, Bose and Patel, both were very, very popular
[Guest]: and charismatic leaders, and they had big organizational influence, Bose Gandhi debate
[Guest]: of 1930s when Bose became the president of the Congress Party.
[Guest]: So so so so Vashney in his book basically writes that one shudders to think what would
[Guest]: have happened to India, if instead of Nehru, Bose or Patel would have become the Prime
[Guest]: Minister, first Prime Minister of the country.
[Guest]: So I think, depending upon your ideological position today, you would have a point of
[Guest]: view on that particular question.
[Guest]: But I think in a diverse country like India, the passing of Baten from Britishers and and
[Guest]: basically to the liberal elite, it allowed India to remain democratic, perhaps with some
[Guest]: deficiencies and everything.
[Guest]: But if we would have gone other way, and by that I don't mean Bose or Patel.
[Guest]: But if a conservative politician would have sort of like, got the Baten, I think the very
[Guest]: much idea of democracy in India would have been in danger.
[Guest]: So this counterfactual thought experiment, I sort of like tells me that, okay, there
[Guest]: were the discourse in the beginning was dominated by liberal elite, who sort of presented them
[Guest]: as patrons of masses.
[Guest]: But in doing so, at least they germinated the idea of democracy in our country.
[Amit Varma]: No, and there's a fascinating insight in that thought experiment, in the sense that as you
[Amit Varma]: correctly pointed out that of all the ideas of India, which could have won out, there
[Amit Varma]: is only one idea of India, which would have allowed the others to contest it and emerge.
[Amit Varma]: So today, if you have say, some would argue that the idea of India, which is on the ascendant
[Amit Varma]: today is not just the idea of Narendra Modi, but also the idea of Vallabhbhai Patel and
[Amit Varma]: this is maybe the direction he would have liked to take India in though I don't think
[Amit Varma]: that's exactly correct, but some would make that point.
[Amit Varma]: Then the point to be made there is that other idea has emerged and triumphed in our democracy,
[Amit Varma]: because we first ensured that it was a liberal democracy to begin with.
[Amit Varma]: That's actually the most satisfying answer of all the ones that my guests have given
[Amit Varma]: me so far.
[Amit Varma]: You've kind of described the sort of the contestations around statism.
[Amit Varma]: Before we go in for a break, tell me a little bit about the contestations around recognition.
[Guest]: So I think we discussed some of it, especially on the reservation debate, but also on the
[Guest]: question of majoritarianism, which is basically whether the Indian state should queue to majoritarian
[Guest]: tendencies, or it should become more accommodative of religious minorities.
[Guest]: I think we didn't do enough justice on that question in terms of like, there was ambivalent
[Guest]: in the position of leaders at the time of independence.
[Guest]: And I think that's what ideological conflict do, right?
[Guest]: It allows you to sort of like, mitigate on certain questions, but on other questions,
[Guest]: you have to be accommodated of the opposition.
[Guest]: So we create a secular state, but we allow in our directive principles, that we will
[Guest]: think about UCC, we will think about religious conversion, we will allow, we'll think about
[Guest]: what to do with animal husbandry and cow slaughter, right?
[Guest]: So in some ways, and many, many have pointed out, it has become a practice that anything,
[Guest]: any government functions in India happens through a Hindu ritual.
[Guest]: Now, you could say that this is a cultural practice, but then by following one sort of
[Guest]: cultural practice, you're basically towing to the majoritarian ritual practice.
[Guest]: So I think that's the reflection of the ideological conflict, as well as some scholars have gone
[Guest]: to the extent of saying that what emerged in 1950s was a Hindu state.
[Guest]: That basically, we were more accommodative of Hindu majoritarian demands than basically
[Amit Varma]: liberal secular.
[Amit Varma]: But the point that the BJP has throughout made, the Jansangh made before it and the
[Amit Varma]: BJP has kind of made is that the Congress's version of secularism, what they call pseudo-secularism
[Amit Varma]: was pandering to minorities.
[Guest]: So I think perhaps in practice, Congress ended up doing that.
[Guest]: So secularism, which was a matter of conviction of our founding fathers, because the idea
[Guest]: of India would not have survived without a secular India, slowly became a politics of
[Guest]: convenience, a politics of compulsion.
[Guest]: But it's no longer a matter of sort of like ideological conviction, but basically, and
[Guest]: I think BJP's opposition is that they do sort of appeasement of Muslims and they haven't
[Guest]: done anything to uplift those population.
[Guest]: And I think to some extent, that charge is not wrong.
[Guest]: What the secular or so-called secular parties did, they basically sort of like used Muslim
[Guest]: elites to mobilize Muslim population, but did not do enough for the Muslim masses in
[Guest]: that sense.
[Guest]: And come to think of it, right?
[Guest]: In 60 years, Congress ruled most of the states.
[Guest]: How many Muslim chief ministers can you think outside the state of Assam and Jammu Kashmir,
[Guest]: where given the population, you will have a natural choice as a Muslim chief minister?
[Guest]: I can remember only perhaps one example from Maharashtra and six month period for, I don't
[Guest]: remember the name, but in Bihar, right?
[Guest]: Other state Congress never made Muslim chief ministers.
[Guest]: How many sort of like Muslim ministers or MPs came out from the Congress party or other
[Guest]: secular parties?
[Guest]: So the BJP is being now able to mobilize not just on the question of secularism, but also
[Guest]: on the question of social justice, right?
[Guest]: Because what they have managed to convince the last section of Indian population, that
[Guest]: again, this was basically, so politics of reservation for OBC was not an OBC politics.
[Guest]: It was just for Yadavs in North India, right?
[Guest]: Politics reservation for Dalits was not meant for all SCs.
[Guest]: It was just meant for Jatavs in Hindi heartland.
[Guest]: And I think what BJP has managed to do is exploit the fault lines on both the social
[Guest]: justice secularism, as well as some sort of like nationalism, patriotism angle.
[Amit Varma]: I love the way your eyes light up when we talk about politics, we're going to take a
[Amit Varma]: brief break now and we're going to come back and get a little deeper into the nitty gritties
[Amit Varma]: of how Indian politics has evolved through these ideological cleavages, as you put it.
[Unknown]: Hey everybody, welcome to another week on the IBM podcast network.
[Unknown]: If you're not following us on social media, please make sure you do.
[Unknown]: We're IBM podcast on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram.
[Unknown]: As I have asked you guys before, if you're finding what you listen to interesting, then
[Unknown]: please take a screenshot of what you're listening to.
[Unknown]: Send us a note with it, tag us on social media.
[Unknown]: We'll either, you know, talk about it.
[Unknown]: We'll take the feedback into consideration or repost it.
[Unknown]: We just really appreciate getting feedback like that, as do all of our hosts.
[Unknown]: Also want to mention the fact that we're still hiring at the best place on earth to work
[Unknown]: in, which is the IBM podcast network.
[Unknown]: So if you're interested, please do send us an email to careers at indisfox.com.
[Unknown]: One other thing I wanted to mention that this is the week of the crossover.
[Unknown]: We have not one, not two, not three, but four crossovers this week on the network.
[Unknown]: Hosts from one show are showing up on another.
[Unknown]: And so if you'd like to listen to your favorite host in a different context, stay tuned and
[Unknown]: find out where they appear.
[Unknown]: On the Ronnie Screwballer podcast, Ronnie talks to me about the importance of focus,
[Unknown]: empathy, and choices, and how those three aspects have formed the crux of his journey.
[Unknown]: On Cider Says, we have a crossover episode as film and TV journalists and hosts of the
[Unknown]: podcast on the very IBM network that you're listening to right now.
[Unknown]: Mr. and Mrs. Binge Watch, Anirudh and Janice Sequeira talk to Cyrus about how spouses with
[Unknown]: different tastes in TV get along, how to interview celebrities, and the onslaught of remakes.
[Unknown]: On Gana Tantra, Alok and Surya talk about the institutional tug of war between the judiciary
[Unknown]: and the political executive over appointment of high court and Supreme Court judges.
[Unknown]: You can also catch Gana Tantra host Alok Prasanna Kumar as a guest on the Pragati podcast talking
[Unknown]: to Pawan Srinath about how India's anti-defection law has undermined democracy.
[Unknown]: On A Simplified Shorty, Chuck, Naren, and Shriketh talk about all of the other unusual
[Unknown]: variants of crickets which are played around the world, things like whoop cricket and stuff
[Unknown]: like that.
[Unknown]: I think you'll enjoy that.
[Unknown]: On Keeping It Queer, Naveen and Farhad are joined by Mr. Gay World India, Suresh Ramdas.
[Unknown]: He throws light on gay pageants and why this representation matters.
[Unknown]: On States of Anarchy, Anahita Majumdar of Himal South Asian joins Humstony to discuss
[Unknown]: the crackdown on press freedoms across South Asia.
[Unknown]: On Paperback, the founder of Arugula and Company, Niharika Goenka joins Satyajit and Racheta
[Unknown]: to discuss her secrets to the healthy lifestyle and books that motivate her thoughts.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's get you on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Rahul Verma, co-author with Prateep Chhibber of the excellent, thought-provoking
[Amit Varma]: book Ideology and Identity.
[Amit Varma]: It'll give you new insights into Indian politics, so do pick it up.
[Amit Varma]: Continuing from where we left, you kind of described how you guys disagree with the notion
[Amit Varma]: that Indian politics isn't ideological.
[Amit Varma]: You pointed out that what we think of as a typical ideological cleavages of the West
[Amit Varma]: don't apply to India, but we have our own ideological cleavages which have come from
[Amit Varma]: our history.
[Amit Varma]: One, around statism, the role of the state in redesigning society or the economy.
[Amit Varma]: And two, around the politics of recognition.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what you also do in your book is that you tackle people's descriptions of what Indian
[Amit Varma]: politics actually is about.
[Amit Varma]: For example, people say Indian politics is all identity politics based around vote banks.
[Amit Varma]: People say it's patronage politics and voters are basically bribed during elections and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So tackle them one by one for me.
[Amit Varma]: As far as identity politics is concerned, you're obviously not taking an absolute disposition
[Amit Varma]: that identity doesn't matter because the title of your book is Ideology and Identity.
[Amit Varma]: But tell me a little bit about your thinking on this and how do you test for the importance
[Amit Varma]: of identity in the views that people hold?
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So, as you rightly said, we're not sort of taking that position that identities don't
[Guest]: matter.
[Guest]: In fact, one part of me deeply believes that your ideological position are also related
[Guest]: to your social identities because given that the ideological conflict is on the question
[Guest]: of identity, right, if it's about accommodating lower caste or religious minorities into
[Guest]: body politics, then it is related to your identity.
[Guest]: Similarly, your identity is determined in what kind of social and economic norms you
[Guest]: are embedded in and if state is going to change that, then again, you are sort of like interacting
[Guest]: with the identity portion.
[Guest]: What we sort of like disagree with that there is some sort of like determinism attached
[Guest]: to your identities as if identities alone determine what you are going to sort of like
[Guest]: your policy preferences are going to be and which political party you're going to vote
[Guest]: for and these kind of like debates or talks become much more common during elections in
[Guest]: India where all conversations start and begins with caste as if you are born into a certain
[Guest]: caste and you are going to vote for a particular political party and the way politics in India
[Guest]: is changing, I think it is leaving many more people surprised because we started with that
[Guest]: assumption.
[Guest]: So, what we are basically doing in one of the chapters trying to sort of distangle identity
[Guest]: and ideological platform and so in the world I come from where I was doing my PhD, there's
[Guest]: a particular way of sort of like writing things, so you make a theoretical point, you also
[Guest]: take on the counter arguments and then you provide evidence for your theoretical point
[Guest]: and then there are new methods being developed to test for some of these questions.
[Guest]: So how do you separate identity and ideology that was the question for us.
[Guest]: So what we basically do in that chapter use evidence from a survey experiment to show
[Guest]: that despite your identity, whatever caste or religion you are born into or practice,
[Guest]: it doesn't, though it may be correlated with your ideological platform, but it is not deterministic
[Guest]: in that sense.
[Guest]: So that's what we do is basically showing that prejudice does play a role, but there
[Guest]: is an independent effect of your ideological beliefs on what you sort of do.
[Amit Varma]: So I have two kind of questions here.
[Amit Varma]: One is that while it's obviously correct to say that identity is not deterministic and
[Amit Varma]: you might even be arguing with a straw man there because who says it is, but while it's
[Amit Varma]: correct to say that identity is not deterministic, like you can't look at an individual and say
[Amit Varma]: that his identity or her identity determines the way she will vote.
[Amit Varma]: But you can look at a group and say that it is likely that this group will feel this way
[Amit Varma]: because of his identity.
[Amit Varma]: An example being that I think it's fair to say and correct me if I'm wrong, that the
[Amit Varma]: average upper caste person would be against reservations, or the average middle class
[Amit Varma]: person would be against redistribution or high taxation.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not going into the merits of any of these policies, that they are more complicated.
[Amit Varma]: But these are sort of the positions that they would hold on average.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, there is something to be said about identity, determining even one's ideological
[Amit Varma]: position, which brings me to the second point, where you've got these very interesting surveys
[Amit Varma]: in your books, and you've got a lot of data which shows that people's positions on certain
[Amit Varma]: issues like reservations could be partly determined by identity, but are partly also determined
[Amit Varma]: by ideological position or other first principles which they come from.
[Amit Varma]: But my sort of how I teased that out is by asking you that, could it not be the case
[Amit Varma]: that many of those counter views, many of those ideological positions that appear to
[Amit Varma]: come from first principles, are rationalizations of a tribal instinct that they feel arising
[Amit Varma]: from their identity, like how can you, you know, account for that?
[Guest]: So you're right, I think that deterministic point was a bit far fetched, or a stretch.
[Guest]: But think of what you said, all political parties are rooted in social cleavages, not
[Guest]: just in India, across the world, right?
[Guest]: If you look at Democrats in United States, a large portion of their votes would come
[Guest]: from African Americans and white poor and Hispanics and immigrants.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the argument can be made, in fact, I'm just thinking a lot, sorry for interrupting,
[Amit Varma]: but the idea can also be made that a lot of that politics is actually more based on identity
[Amit Varma]: than people previously would realize and less based on ideology.
[Amit Varma]: And again, I'm just thinking aloud that could possibly account for the rightward drift of
[Amit Varma]: the Republican Party in recent times, where a lot of the previously avowed ideological
[Amit Varma]: principles like earlier, ideologically, they were for free trade, but now they no longer
[Amit Varma]: seem to be so as they're all behind Trump.
[Amit Varma]: So you could argue that a lot of those ideological positions were positions of convenience.
[Amit Varma]: And it all boils down to identity at the end of the day.
[Guest]: So the two, in fact, three questions, so let me tackle first two.
[Guest]: So yes, there is a relationship between identity and voting for a particular party.
[Guest]: But why are they doing so?
[Guest]: Because that particular political party espouses some policy platforms that are closer to their
[Guest]: identity.
[Guest]: And those policy platforms are actually those ideological beliefs, right?
[Guest]: Why does a Dalit vote for a Bahujan Samaj Party in Uttar Pradesh?
[Guest]: Because they think that Bahujan Samaj Party takes care of Dalit interest, right?
[Guest]: And that's the idea.
[Guest]: This is so when I was talking about the determinism, it is not because I was born into this category
[Guest]: and I have a leader belongs to that category and we like each other is basically because
[Guest]: I think that this party takes care of my interest.
[Guest]: And interests are basically reflected in your ideological leanings, right?
[Guest]: So that's the limited point I was trying to make there.
[Guest]: The second, I think what you are trying to suggest is that parties leave their position
[Guest]: and they sort of take up new positions.
[Guest]: So it's a matter of convenience.
[Guest]: You can say that, but then this ideological space, which is structures or under grits
[Guest]: the conflict and party politics is not a static space.
[Guest]: Political parties in some ways, organizationally dynamic, they will keep bringing new voters
[Guest]: leaving out some old voters.
[Guest]: And that's why the ideological space, not just because of the time and space, but because
[Guest]: of the groups that you sort of like take into that ideological space will also keep moving.
[Guest]: And sometimes it is moved by that's the third point.
[Guest]: It is moved by leaders, right?
[Guest]: And that's one of the chapters where we talk about people are not attached to leaders because
[Guest]: they just like the leader because leaders basically represent a kind of sort of become
[Guest]: a heuristic or a hint for the ideological platforms they want to sort of like believe
[Guest]: in.
[Guest]: And I think one of the points which you were sort of bringing up and it's a hard question
[Guest]: to answer is basically whether they like the leader and then decide the platform, which
[Guest]: you were mentioning in the case of political party and identities, or they have a policy
[Guest]: platform and then they find the leader closest to that policy platform.
[Amit Varma]: What is not so much leader and policy platform like another contestation I had, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in your book where at some point you seem to imply that, like in terms of statism, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: I totally agree with you about the statism cleavage that exists around the state remaking
[Amit Varma]: society.
[Amit Varma]: But as far as the state remaking the economy is concerned, I think there are very, very,
[Amit Varma]: very few people like me, who would want the state to not interfere with the economy and
[Amit Varma]: would allow markets to play a hand.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that a lot of the people in 2014, who supported Modi, some of them were taken
[Amit Varma]: in by the rhetoric, but a lot of them were perhaps couching their innate preference for
[Amit Varma]: some of the other positions of the BJP, like their positions on Muslims or cow slaughter
[Amit Varma]: or whatever, and instead making it sound respectable by talking about economic freedoms, where
[Amit Varma]: they didn't really give a damn about economic freedoms.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not that they decide to support a particular leader, but it's like, okay, I
[Amit Varma]: do not like Muslims, but I cannot say that.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, I will say that I want free markets.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: But that's the way.
[Amit Varma]: So what you say is identity couched as ideology.
[Guest]: So on the question of majoritarianism, no, but you are expressing so you're not saying,
[Guest]: but by voting for that particular political party, it may not be your top priority, right?
[Guest]: So you may be actually so that's a very different thing, what you're saying that you're voting
[Guest]: for that particular political party, which espouses anti Muslim view, and you have voted
[Guest]: for the anti Muslim view, but you don't want to say that out loud, right?
[Guest]: And so you're saying it's it's, but but is being anti Muslim?
[Guest]: Why are you being is it just prejudice against Muslims?
[Guest]: Or do you think you have problems with Muslims because there are some interesting while they
[Guest]: are taking away your resources that given more preference by the government?
[Guest]: Why do you not like Muslims?
[Amit Varma]: I am saying that there are perhaps a substantial number of people who are simply bigoted, and
[Amit Varma]: who couch their bigotry in more respectable terms.
[Amit Varma]: So they will find a way to couch like they will rail against the pseudo secularism of
[Amit Varma]: the Congress, which is actually a point with a lot of merit.
[Amit Varma]: But they might be bringing that point up for other reasons.
[Amit Varma]: Or they might be saying that no, you know, we need minimum government maximum governance,
[Amit Varma]: which of course, in reality hasn't happened at all under Modi, we've had maximum governance,
[Amit Varma]: maximum governance.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, they will couch it in respectable ideological terms.
[Amit Varma]: But those instincts will be based around identity.
[Guest]: I'm just I mean, I don't mean to disagree with no, no, no, I think what you're asking
[Guest]: is a very, very important question.
[Guest]: We don't do justice to that question in the book.
[Guest]: And perhaps this is something to sort of like, think about.
[Guest]: Because if your hypothesis about prevalence of bigotry is correct, that we have high prevalence
[Guest]: of bigotry, the implications of that is that we should be seeing riots or communal violence
[Guest]: almost on daily basis.
[Guest]: We don't see that happening, I think, or then you would argue that bigotry to violence is
[Guest]: sort of like another chain.
[Amit Varma]: It's another chain.
[Amit Varma]: But also, I'm not saying there's a high prevalence of bigotry, I kind of have more faith in my
[Amit Varma]: country than that.
[Amit Varma]: I think that there are a lot of reasons why one can vote for, say, the BJP and bigotry
[Amit Varma]: is just one small part of the mix.
[Guest]: I think what you're asking is, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And also, I completely like we'll talk about leadership a little later in the episode.
[Amit Varma]: But I also agree that, you know, Modi as a transformational leader, a lot of his support,
[Amit Varma]: especially in these recent elections, when you consider the broad base of the support,
[Amit Varma]: and the number of Dalits who voted for Modi, a lot of it is not because of identity is
[Amit Varma]: definitely because of ideology.
[Amit Varma]: And that almost, in fact, proves very emphatically the point that you're making.
[Amit Varma]: So I didn't really mean to sound as if I like that.
[Guest]: I like those questions.
[Guest]: In fact, some pushback is very, very important, because this is not the end of the research
[Guest]: on ideology and party system, this is the beginning of it.
[Guest]: And of course, the beginning of the research, there are going to be lots of mistakes, there
[Guest]: are a lot of going to be deficiencies, and these questions will make us think hard and
[Amit Varma]: perhaps come up with better answers.
[Amit Varma]: No, and you've made me through your book, you guys have made me question my prior assumptions.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, maybe this is just reflexive, I'm fighting back.
[Amit Varma]: Another point that you kind of bring up, and again, you're not taking an absolute disposition,
[Amit Varma]: it's important to say is, for example, voter bribery, right, where you say that it is simplistic
[Amit Varma]: to say that voters are bribed during elections, that's not quite how it is.
[Amit Varma]: Can you elaborate on that?
[Guest]: So now there is a large literature on developing countries, which basically describes them,
[Guest]: these countries as patronage democracies, clientelistic politics, where basically the
[Guest]: one line summary of this argument is that voters in these countries vote for a politician
[Guest]: in exchange of some goodies that could range from job expectation of job to a sari, a samosa,
[Guest]: or some cash.
[Guest]: Now, we're not saying that these things are not there in our elections, basically, that
[Guest]: would mean we're closing eyes and not looking at what is happening.
[Guest]: And so all of this, like cash supply or distribution of these goodies are there.
[Guest]: But what we are sort of challenging is that the vote is not contingent upon whether I
[Guest]: receive an item or not.
[Guest]: It has become like, so it's not quid pro quo, but it's anti-quid pro quo, where basically
[Guest]: like a poker game, the political culture, and this is not a good thing, in last 70 years
[Guest]: have evolved in a way that all politicians have to put in money, and that will sort of
[Guest]: like make them seem winnable or competitive to be in the race.
[Guest]: But that would not sort of determine whether they are going to win the election for sure
[Guest]: or not.
[Amit Varma]: But if you don't put in money, you're surely going to lose.
[Amit Varma]: So it's like a hygiene factor.
[Amit Varma]: I think our mutual friend Milan Vaishnav, who in fact introduced us, made this point
[Amit Varma]: in his podcast with me where he kind of said that, you know, whether bribery works or not,
[Amit Varma]: all parties have to at least offer a bribe and a counterpoint to doesn't that then make
[Amit Varma]: bribery the rigor, for example, and it also depends on like bribery is not just giving
[Amit Varma]: a sack of rice or a pressure cooker or whatever, there are sort of policy bribes, for example,
[Amit Varma]: farm loan waivers, we've kind of reached the equilibrium in this country where it is understood
[Amit Varma]: that to win an election, that is one of the things you will have to do offer a farm loan
[Amit Varma]: waiver, which often in the short immediate term, I think provides even a necessary anesthetic
[Amit Varma]: for farmers sometimes, but is nowhere near the long term solution that we need to do
[Amit Varma]: and we don't carry out those long term structural reforms.
[Guest]: Absolutely, I completely agree with you. And that's why we think that despite this ideological
[Guest]: conflict, the political culture is such that competitive populism in our politics is going
[Guest]: to continue. And, and the limited point we wanted to sort of make through this chapter
[Guest]: is that these goodies or even bribery by the incumbent in form of policy happens during
[Guest]: all party regimes. And if this was driving our electoral politics, incumbents would always
[Guest]: have a leg up. And they should be returning back not just as MPs, MLAs and government
[Guest]: leaders. Like we have a big example on 2017 UP election, where Akhilesh Yadav ran a government
[Guest]: which was patronage by rule book. In fact, targeted almost every kind of voter that was
[Guest]: possible. And Akhilesh by no means was running. So his government may have been a little bit
[Guest]: unpopular, but he was certainly seen as a popular leader. And despite that, they not
[Guest]: just lost the elections, but lost it badly. So the limited idea we are making, there is
[Guest]: influence of the so these goodies are very much part of our election game. A lot of cash
[Guest]: is sort of like needed to build a campaign in a short period of time. But the vote is
[Guest]: not contingent upon this vote is very much an independent choice. It is partly driven
[Guest]: by identity, partly driven by ideology. Maybe at margins, some votes will be getting influenced
[Guest]: by these goodies and welfare policies. But to describe this as a patronage democracy
[Guest]: or a clientelistic politics is a little bit of a stretch.
[Amit Varma]: That's a fair point. And you're making a nuanced point, you're not being absolutist in saying
[Amit Varma]: that bribery doesn't matter at all you're saying is multifactorial. This might be one
[Amit Varma]: of the factors. Let's not overstate it. Just to needle you, I say I used to write weekly
[Amit Varma]: limericks for the Times of India. So just to needle you, I'll quote a limerick about
[Amit Varma]: exactly the subject. I think it's called politics and the limerick is a neta who loves currency
[Amit Varma]: notes told me what his line of work denotes. It is kind of funny. We steal people's money
[Amit Varma]: and use some of it to buy their votes. Stop good. No, but your book is perhaps a response
[Amit Varma]: to that. Let's move on to another subject which you know, you brought up a moment ago
[Amit Varma]: and I found your chapter on it quite fascinating, which is the subject of leadership, where
[Amit Varma]: you point out that there are really two kinds of leaders in politics, especially Indian
[Amit Varma]: politics. And one kind is driven by ideology. Tell me a little bit more about this.
[Guest]: So and it's related to this logic of bribery and patronage. So a lot of research in political
[Guest]: science is basically focused on these small time fixers or very local level politicians
[Guest]: whom we describe as transactional leaders that I will do something for you and you vote
[Guest]: for me. And and so the focus has been on these fixers and brokers and local level politicians.
[Guest]: But political science, and this is like a serious problem within political science that
[Guest]: we don't study leaders, leaders of sort of like, not just prime ministers or chief ministers,
[Guest]: but basically people who have influence in a large part of society. And the reason they
[Guest]: have a large influence, because they project themselves as transformational, they may not
[Guest]: turn out to be transformational. But the vision they project is that they are going to transform
[Guest]: society. And because of that kind of vision, they can not only enthuse their own party
[Guest]: carders, but they inspire a large swathe of masses. And there is some measurable impacts,
[Guest]: which we show in the book. But think of the politics in this country is not shaped by
[Guest]: these local level brokers and local level politicians. Political parties are moved in
[Guest]: moved in the system by these big influential leaders. As soon as you think of Lalu Yadav,
[Guest]: you may sort of like imagine something about him of being a backward caste politician,
[Guest]: right? Mayawati, a Dalit politician, or Narendra Modi, a Hindu Hudayshamrat, you attach some
[Guest]: ideas with all these leaders, right? And that's why what we are trying to make the case in
[Guest]: this chapter is these leaders who project themselves as transformational, portray an
[Guest]: ideological vision, and they structure or shape party politics in the country.
[Amit Varma]: Sadanand And so transactional leaders tend to be more
[Amit Varma]: local, whereas transformational leaders are, you know, many of the great names that have
[Amit Varma]: walked on the Indian political landscape, like Indira Gandhi, Anna Durai, MG Ramchandran,
[Amit Varma]: Narendra Modi, to the present day, Mayawati and Kanchi Ram are all transformational leaders,
[Amit Varma]: because there is a broader ideological view that they have, and a specific place they
[Amit Varma]: have on the issues of both statism and recognition that appeals to people.
[Guest]: Yeah, and think of like, in 2014 and 2019, journalists and political scientists and common
[Guest]: people alike would talk about a Modi effect in the election. What does Modi effect means?
[Guest]: Is it just about Modi's personality? He was not promising them that you vote for me, I
[Guest]: will get a road in next to your house, or I'll offer you a samosa or a sari or 500 rupee
[Guest]: note, I might be offering 15 lakh that's different. But But the idea is the even when we talk
[Guest]: about Narendra Modi, Narendra Modi represents some vision, and he can very well articulate
[Guest]: that vision. And perhaps that is the reason of his popularity, because there is clarity
[Guest]: of articulation on one side of the ideological spectrum, and there is disarray on the other
[Guest]: side. And that increases the gap, which sort of like create some Modi effect.
[Amit Varma]: No, and as I'll ask you to elaborate on as we're ending the episode a little later, will
[Amit Varma]: be essentially how Modi's transformational appeal as it were, is so vast that he actually
[Amit Varma]: I think in this election, more Dalits voted for the BJP than for Congress.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that had happened in 2014.
[Amit Varma]: In 2014 also. And in fact, the Dalit leader, Jignesh Mewani, had a lament on Twitter rather
[Amit Varma]: about how he doesn't understand why so many Dalits are voting for the BJP. And given,
[Amit Varma]: you know, where the BJP once stood on the politics of recognition is surprising, but
[Amit Varma]: it's also very interesting how, you know, Modi's managed to on the basis of his leadership
[Amit Varma]: sort of widen the base of his party as it were, what I'm going to ask you to do and
[Amit Varma]: what I found very sort of insightful. And if I had one feedback for the book, I would
[Amit Varma]: ask you, why did this come so late in the book, where you talk about the four different
[Amit Varma]: political periods in the political evolution of India, which is really fascinating to me.
[Amit Varma]: So just kind of take me through those four periods.
[Guest]: Okay, so it comes late into the book, because we are boring political scientists, and we
[Guest]: have sort of like a way of presenting the material, right? Theory, counter argument,
[Guest]: evidence, and then what are the implications, right? What is the big picture implication
[Guest]: of this? So, so that's the Dandamar way of writing things. So what we are basically it's
[Guest]: a re-reading of Indian political history. So there is a consensus among political scientists
[Guest]: that 1952 to 67 was the first phase of party system where Congress was a dominant party.
[Guest]: Political scientists like me care about party system because it structures the rules of
[Guest]: the competition. So in some ways, as a voter, you are going to choose from the menu that
[Guest]: you are going to get. And so party system in some ways is presenting you the effective
[Amit Varma]: choices that you have.
[Amit Varma]: And what I found particularly interesting about your analysis was that you were talking
[Amit Varma]: about these four different periods in the context of the ideological cleavages in your
[Amit Varma]: book, which is statism and recognition. So kind of take me through that, that you know,
[Amit Varma]: where was the Congress in that first period with regard to those two? How did that change?
[Guest]: How did it evolve?
[Guest]: Well, I would sort of like now ask you to imagine a three-dimensional space where if
[Guest]: you have one axis of recognition and other axis of statism, Congress in the beginning
[Guest]: is sort of sitting at the center, the large umbrella political party sitting at the center.
[Guest]: Then on the right, you have lots of smaller political parties. So Bharatiya Jan Sangh,
[Guest]: Ram Rajyam Parishad of Karpatri Maharaj, Hindu Mahasabha, later on in 60s, you get Swatantra
[Guest]: Party. So there were lots of these parties. On the other side, you had lots of socialist
[Guest]: parties. So Praja Socialist Party, Kishan Mazdoor Party, Communist Parties. So these
[Guest]: were there in the beginning. What happens in 1967, dominance of Congress in the beginning,
[Amit Varma]: Congress is sitting at the center.
[Amit Varma]: Just to clarify, then the Congress is doing both a certain amount of statism and the politics
[Amit Varma]: of recognition. But those on the left, the communists and the socialists and all feel
[Amit Varma]: not enough.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: And those on the right say that no, the state should not interfere with society so much
[Guest]: and no, don't give reservations.
[Guest]: That is correct. So actually, the first split in the Congress, first big, so there was a
[Guest]: split around 1906, when the Surat Congress got split. But I think in 1930s and 40s, when
[Guest]: we are closer to the independence, there were politicians who you would describe as socialist
[Guest]: or communist within the Congress Party. So Congress was the large national umbrella movement.
[Guest]: The socialist wing of the Congress Party felt, and at one point Nehru was part of that group
[Guest]: felt, that the Congress leadership is not doing enough on their policy platform. So
[Guest]: they leave the Congress Party and form the Congress Socialist Party in 1934, which later
[Guest]: on becomes the Praja Socialist Party and KMPP and then Socialist Party. So that's the linear.
[Guest]: So what you would in traditional sense, think of the socialist within the Congress, left
[Guest]: the Congress pre-independence and slowly, the process was complete by 1950s, 60s. And
[Guest]: then you had lots of these right wing players. So Congress was basically sitting in the center
[Guest]: in a sense, they were doing few things, but not doing enough. For example, they did appoint
[Guest]: Kaka Kalelkar commission on the OBC reservation, but they didn't do anything on that. Right.
[Guest]: And similarly on the Hindu code bill happens, but nothing happens on the uniform civil codes.
[Guest]: So they were not taking it to the logical conclusion. And whereas the right wing parties
[Guest]: had a very different idea. So in 67, when Mrs. Gandhi is now the prime minister of the
[Guest]: country, she faces challenge from the right. And what she does is basically moves the Congress
[Guest]: party closer to the council. In fact, the 67 government had a communist party of India,
[Guest]: basically supporting Mrs. Gandhi's Congress. So she moves closer to those ideological position
[Guest]: on both, especially the statism part between 67 and 89. In fact, she takes lots of steps
[Guest]: related to the marriage age, related to dowry, which basically further in some ways, the
[Guest]: traditionalist, the Hindu traditionalist within the Congress felt further marginalized, and
[Guest]: they slowly started leaving out the Congress party. If you think of the, the syndicates
[Guest]: within the Congress party, they were in some ways the conservative politicians. In fact,
[Guest]: Gulzarilal Nanda, who was two time interim prime minister, is also one of the founding
[Guest]: members of the Vishwa Hindu Parishad. So because she moves the Congress party in one direction,
[Guest]: now the space was created there. So right leaning elements basically started coming
[Guest]: together. So now, now what you see in 1980 as Bharatiya Janata Party is not just the
[Guest]: Bharatiya Janata Party, it had elements of BJS, but also elements of Hindu Mahasabha,
[Guest]: elements of Ram Rajya Parishad, elements of Swatantrata Party, elements of Congress organization,
[Guest]: which was the split splinter group of the Congress party. So all the conservative elements
[Guest]: basically coalesced together and form the Bharatiya Janata Party in 1980s. And if you
[Guest]: think of the vote share with BJP is basically getting in 18991, this is basically the addition
[Guest]: of all these groups in what they used to get in 1960s.
[Amit Varma]: It's fascinating that for her personal political survival, Indira Gandhi needs to reposition
[Amit Varma]: herself politically. And because her opponents in the party happen to be towards the right,
[Amit Varma]: she goes towards left again, we are using western terms, but she goes towards the left,
[Amit Varma]: there's more statism, therefore, she goes towards, and therefore, she leaves that space,
[Amit Varma]: which eventually coalesces all those years later into the BJP, which is now a more powerful
[Amit Varma]: force. And in fact, you point out, I think at one point that in the 89 or 91 elections,
[Amit Varma]: the BJP got as the same vote share as the Jansan plus the Swatantra Party in the 60s.
[Amit Varma]: So it actually coalesced into that one entity. And then that's correct. So in terms of the
[Amit Varma]: ideological issues of statism and recognition, Indira Gandhi moved a lot towards statism
[Guest]: and on the recognition front, what was happening?
[Guest]: So recognition front, what happens is basically, she doesn't, she's standing right there, which
[Guest]: basically now opens up a space for all these socialist parties. Basically, they were trying
[Guest]: to do some sort of like class mobilization in the first party system. Post 67, they all
[Guest]: become backward caste parties of North India. So they start because nothing was happening
[Guest]: on the reservation front. So now basically, the centrist Congress Party is caught in the
[Guest]: middle, you have basically socialist parties mobilizing on the caste angle, the right wing
[Guest]: parties mobilizing on the religion angle, and the statism angle and the Communist Party
[Guest]: saying you have not done enough on the statism. So basically, Congress starts getting squeezed.
[Guest]: So in the second party system, which is 67 to 89, Congress though remains dominant nationally,
[Guest]: but in the states now it is facing challenges in some places from the BJP in some places
[Guest]: from the Communist in some places from the these backward caste parties or regional parties.
[Amit Varma]: And everywhere these regional parties have come up like in Tamil Nadu, for example, GMK
[Amit Varma]: basically, yeah, running the roost, then let's go to the third party. So third party system
[Guest]: basically begins in 1989, when Congress loses its national dominance also, and we get a
[Guest]: fragmented party system. So what happens in this period, that in places where Congress
[Guest]: gets regional parties, which are ideologically very similar to it, Congress parties almost
[Guest]: finished in that state. You quoted the example of Tamil Nadu, what Congress was basically
[Guest]: doing was one time aligning with DMK one time aligning with with AIDMK. Basically, Congress
[Guest]: Party gets caught between AIDMK and DMK and is now virtually not a player in Tamil Nadu.
[Guest]: Something very similar happens in Uttar Pradesh, Congress Party basically is squeezed by both
[Guest]: the presence of the Samajwadi Party and Bahujan Samaj Party and come to think of it. The reason
[Guest]: is that Congress, it is hard to distinguish ideologically on the question of recognition
[Guest]: and on the question of statism. So these parties are indistinguishable from the Congress Party.
[Guest]: In fact, Congress Party survives in the state and does well in the state where it is in
[Guest]: direct competition with the BJP. Think of Madhya Pradesh, think of Rajasthan, think
[Guest]: of Chhattisgarh, think of Himachal Pradesh. In all these states, the direct competition
[Guest]: of the Congress is BJP. And these two parties are ideologically very different.
[Amit Varma]: So therefore, it can survive when you know, it has that positioning advantage otherwise
[Guest]: is
[Guest]: Yeah, and we use this example to make the point that a lot of people think that the
[Guest]: decline of the Congress was is due to leadership, or due to organizational atrophy. And if these
[Guest]: two were the reasons you have the same leader, you have the similar organization, but the
[Guest]: decline of Congress varies across Indian state, depending upon who is Congress Party's main
[Guest]: competitor. Right. So you see one kind of Congress, which is alive and kicking when
[Guest]: it competes with the BJP, but another Congress kind of Congress Party, which is now defunct
[Guest]: in states like UP, Bihar, Bengal and Tamil Nadu, where you are competing with regional
[Amit Varma]: parties.
[Amit Varma]: So now in this third party phase, the two big M words that come up here are Mandal and
[Amit Varma]: Mandir. So tell me how the resurgence of Mandir and the arrival of Mandal, how do they play
[Amit Varma]: in this ideological landscape of recognition and statism? And how does that bring the lead
[Amit Varma]: into the fourth era, which we're in right now?
[Guest]: So in the book, basically, we mentioned about that perhaps 2014 is the arrival of the fourth
[Guest]: party system, where BJP is going to become the focal point of competition. And now the
[Guest]: 2019 results basically confirm that we are indeed in a BJP dominant party system. What
[Guest]: happens, you mentioned these Mandir and Mandal, which simultaneously occurs in between 1989
[Guest]: and 1991. Now, Congress Party on both questions remains ambivalent. In fact, so think of the
[Guest]: politics that is emerging, right? Somebody tells Rajiv Gandhi, the Prime Minister that
[Guest]: you lost the by polls in 1986. Because you, there was some controversy related to Shah
[Guest]: Bano case, and you didn't do enough. Rajiv Gandhi, in fact, sort of like, twist the parliament's
[Guest]: hand and passes a law. So he's basically sometimes playing with the Muslim conservative politicians.
[Guest]: And at other times, he's trying to be a liberal reformist. Then someone basically tells him
[Guest]: perhaps that now the Muslims are gone, you should think about Hindu conservative politician.
[Guest]: So Rajiv Gandhi basically begins the 1989 election campaigns from Ayodhya. So basically,
[Guest]: playing with fire, trying to do both the things, whereas the BJP takes a very clear position
[Guest]: on both the issue. They don't say much, at least publicly on the question of Mandir reservation,
[Guest]: because they know it would be an electoral society to oppose reservation for such a large
[Guest]: group. But they do prop up proxy opposition to Mandir reservation and to counter the effects
[Guest]: of Mandir reservation, in fact, join the bandwagon of Mandir mobilization. So Ram Mandir mobilization
[Guest]: was happening at the backdrop through Vishwa Hindu Parishad and other RSS affiliates since
[Guest]: early 1980s. After the Meenakshi Puram conversion in 1982, it gained momentum during late 80s.
[Guest]: And this seemed like a good opportunity for them to counter the effects of Mandir and
[Guest]: create a pan Hindu identity. So because BJP took some sort of like clear position, the
[Guest]: first effect of that was that the upper caste basically thought that this party takes care
[Guest]: of their ideological platforms. They left Congress en masse in the Hindi heartland and
[Guest]: joined the BJP. Congress is not doing so is ambivalent on these positions, whereas regional
[Guest]: parties were clear, like the SP was clear on the question of reservation, and also in
[Guest]: some ways, sided on the position which Muslims would have wanted them to take on Ram Mandir
[Guest]: mobilization. And they got the benefit of that. So there were two parties which took
[Guest]: clear position, the Congress didn't do anything. And that's why basically Congress slowly faded
[Guest]: in the Hindi heartland of UP and Bihar.
[Guest]: So bring me now to the fourth party era.
[Guest]: So in 2014, what you see is emergence of BJP as the principal pole of Indian politics.
[Guest]: And 2019 basically now cements the BJP's pole position. Now, what is likely to happen, and
[Guest]: this is a working paper on 2019 elections from where I'm sort of like going to make
[Guest]: the case that it seems and so far the conversation seems on short term factors which led to Modi's
[Guest]: victory, which is basically the leadership popularity, the organizational advantages
[Guest]: BJP has, or their successful presentation of 2019 as a national election and using national
[Guest]: security platform, or basically removing inconveniences through massive welfare schemes such as Ujjwala
[Guest]: and other things. While these factors are definitely important, the reason I think BJP
[Guest]: is becoming the dominant pole of Indian politics is large structural shifts that are taking
[Guest]: place in Indian society. The first one is very simply that the size of the middle class
[Guest]: is increasing, the size of the urban population is increasing, the size of educated voters
[Guest]: is increasing, the size of people who are more media, sort of like exposed to more media
[Amit Varma]: is increasing.
[Amit Varma]: And these guys are likely to be against both statism and recognition.
[Guest]: These guys are essentially, in some ways, BJP voters. And so what is happening is that
[Guest]: the size of the BJP, the pie from which BJP can draw is increasing, but just increase
[Guest]: in demographic share does not mean that they are more likely to vote for the BJP. The second
[Guest]: thing I think what is happening is basically on, so we don't have good evidence on statism,
[Guest]: but there is clear clarity on politics of recognition scale playing a role in basically
[Guest]: bringing these new groups to the BJP fold. One, I think what is happening, political
[Guest]: majoritarianism is increasing. And second, the BJP's use of this EWS quota to change
[Guest]: the whole debate on recognition and affirmative action is bringing these new group of voters.
[Guest]: And what is interesting, and I don't have a good answer right now, it seems that political
[Guest]: majoritarianism is not linked to Hindu nationalism. And why this point is important, because if
[Guest]: it was old style Hindu nationalistic politics, I don't think you would have got an increase
[Guest]: in vote share of Dalits and lower OBCs for the BJP. So I think the old Hindu nationalistic
[Guest]: card was rooted in upper caste sensibilities, whereas this new Modi's political majoritarianism
[Guest]: is devoid of those upper caste biases. And it's a new kind of sort of majority.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, he's an OBC himself. And as you point out in your book, some of the reasons for
[Amit Varma]: the rise of an OBC like Modi to power and the BJP have to do with Govind Acharya's decision
[Amit Varma]: in the 90s to sort of widen the social base of the BJP, which, you know, brings me to
[Amit Varma]: two questions, I'll kind of end the episode with because we're running out of time. But
[Amit Varma]: you know, there are tons of fascinating material in your book. Another question I wanted to
[Amit Varma]: ask was, you've got a very good analysis about the decline of the Congress and why many of
[Amit Varma]: the traditional reasons sorted out by people don't necessarily work. But as we don't have
[Amit Varma]: time for that in this episode, but I hope my listeners will go by your book instantly
[Amit Varma]: and read it, support good scholarship. But both my questions are essentially about the
[Amit Varma]: BJP. One of them is that one of the things that Amit Shah has been doing as a political
[Amit Varma]: strategist is sort of widening the base, but widening the base can also in some ways mean
[Amit Varma]: diluting the ideology or what the party stands for. For example, they are getting sort of
[Amit Varma]: defections from other parties almost indiscriminately now anyone who wishes to join and can bring
[Amit Varma]: a base with him just join. And then that, you know, so it's a question of will to power
[Amit Varma]: versus ideology. The will to power is fantastic. But doesn't this dilute the ideology and what
[Amit Varma]: the party actually stands for? Question number one. And question number two, as you point
[Amit Varma]: out the increasing urbanization of and this was one of the very interesting points towards
[Amit Varma]: the end of your book, that the increasing urbanization of India makes another kind of
[Amit Varma]: fissure apparent, where a lot of the people who sort of support Modi for multiple reasons
[Amit Varma]: now will not have those multiple reasons to support him in future. So just elaborate on
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: That's correct. I think so BJP is now a dominant party, but will it remain a dominant party
[Guest]: for a long time? They need to so there are emerging contradictions within the coalition
[Guest]: that has brought BJP to power and they have to work on it. You are absolutely right about
[Guest]: basically BJP taking in politicians from outside and whether it would dilute ideology. Now
[Guest]: that remains an open question because political parties are not just there to sort of like
[Guest]: follow an ideological doctrine, but primary reason they exist because they want to be
[Guest]: in power. So given that there is some sort of like vulnerability factor associated in
[Guest]: bringing these politicians, all political parties would do that. But is BJP going to
[Guest]: sort of like allow these new kind of politicians to run the show and not tow its ideological
[Guest]: line? I think if they do that, they would be in trouble with their ideological sort
[Guest]: of like fountainhead and there would be sticks from Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh. In fact,
[Guest]: there have been warning signs after this election. They are continuously trying to push back
[Guest]: that don't make it a personality centric government or personality centric election or on personality.
[Guest]: This is a victory of our ideas. The second point I think we must sort of like keep this
[Guest]: in mind and that that happens with all political parties. When you expand, you bring in not
[Guest]: just different sort of like politicians who don't share your ideology, but you also bring
[Guest]: voters who are not part of your core support group. Now, they will come to you and vote
[Guest]: for you, but they would want something in return. They would want representation. This
[Guest]: is what happened with the Congress parties in 1970s. It was getting vote from all segments
[Guest]: of the society, but large part of Congress leadership remained upper caste. So basically,
[Guest]: many leaders moved out and formed different political parties and the decline of the Congress
[Guest]: thus began. It would happen with the BJP also, if the party remains upper caste in its leadership
[Guest]: structure. For some time, when you have a charismatic personality like Modi, these contradictions
[Guest]: would be sort of like subdued. But once someone like Modi goes and you don't have a replacement,
[Guest]: these would unravel like anything. The final point, which is important, that we have to
[Guest]: understand the changing context in India. So, BJP in some ways practices conservative
[Guest]: politics on social norms, but large segment of voters which are voting for BJP are receiving
[Guest]: global messages and as much we will get integrated into global economy, they would receive very
[Guest]: different kind of messages and aspire very different kind of life. So, they might be
[Guest]: voting Modi for fulfillment of certain aspirations. But if on other parameters, they feel threatened
[Guest]: by the politics of BJP, that would create its own sort of like contradictions and fissures.
[Guest]: And I think that is where the BJP's challenge lies, to be able to manage these contradictions
[Guest]: and hold on to the ideological coalition they have created.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you could argue that, you know, the fact that they won in 2014 and 2019 is almost
[Amit Varma]: like a perfect storm of events coming together, managing to draw all these disparate social
[Amit Varma]: groups who are not yet this enamored of the BJP. And there's a telling line from your
[Amit Varma]: book when you talk about the growing urban voter where you say, quote, the young may
[Amit Varma]: hold their noses and vote for the BJP, especially because of a lack of credible ideological
[Amit Varma]: alternatives. But this support will not last because this group is not enamored of majoritarian
[Amit Varma]: politics. Stop quote, which is interesting. And is it also the case that there might be
[Amit Varma]: people who might feel that the BJP led by Modi in this sort of broad based avatar is
[Amit Varma]: not doing enough for the Hindu cause?
[Amit Varma]: It is possible.
[Amit Varma]: Right. Rahul, it's been fantastic talking to you. I learned a lot today. Thank you so
[Guest]: much for coming on the show.
[Guest]: Thank you for those questions. I enjoyed it.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, head on over to your nearest bookstore online or
[Amit Varma]: offline and pick up Ideology and Identity by Pradeep Chhibber and Rahul Verma. You can
[Amit Varma]: follow Rahul on Twitter at Rahul underscore T Verma. You can follow me at Amit Verma,
[Amit Varma]: A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. Don't make a mistake. You can browse past episodes of The Seen and
[Amit Varma]: the Unseen at seenunseen.in, thinkpragati.com and ivmpodcast.com. The Seen and the Unseen
[Amit Varma]: is supported by the Takshashila Institution, an independent centre for research and education
[Amit Varma]: in public policy. Takshashila offers 12-week courses in public policy, technology policy
[Amit Varma]: and strategic studies for both full-time students and working professionals. Visit takshashila.org.in
[Unknown]: for more details. Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai